Mukesh Mann vs The State Govt. Of Nct Of Delhi on 8 August, 2019

Petitioner impugns order dated 23.09.2017 whereby charge has been framed against the petitioner under Section 138 of the Electricity Act, 2003. As per the complaint lodged by respondent No.2 theft of electricity was found in the premises of the petitioner whereby a wire was connected directly to the public pole outside the shop of the petitioner. 
Learned counsel for the petitioner submits that petitioner had rented out the shop to a tenant in the year 2002-2003 and on account of non- payment of rent the services to the tenant i.e. electricity supply were got disconnected and the tenant thereafter without the knowledge and consent of the petitioner allegedly connected a wire directly to the electricity pole CRL.REV.P 869/2017  of 4 outside the shop. 
Learned counsel further submits that proceedings were initiated by respondent No.2 against the said tenant wherein the tenant was convicted and he paid the civil liability amount. Subsequently, subject proceedings were initiated against the petitioner on the allegation that the wire was connected with his consent and knowledge. 
Learned counsel submits that petitioner did not give his consent for the same and there is no material to show that there was any knowledge of the petitioner of the direct theft of electricity. 
Parties were referred to mediation. Mediation Settlement dated 02.08.2019 has been executed. Learned counsel for the petitioner submits that without prejudice to his rights and contentions, petitioner had agreed to pay the settlement amount of Rs.18,267/- to the respondent No.2. The settled amount has already been paid. 
Learned counsel appearing for respondent No.2 under instructions from Mr. Amit Singh, AGM (Legal) who is the authorised representative of respondent No.2 confirms the Settlement Agreement and submits that payment in terms thereof has been received. He further submits that he has no objection to the compounding of the subject offence and even discharge of the petitioner. 
Keeping in view the totality of facts and circumstances and also the fact that the parties have settled their disputes, I am of the view that this is a fit case for exercise of powers under Section 482 of the Cr.P.C for putting an end to the proceedings. Reference may be made to the judgment of the Supreme Court in State of Haryana &amp; others versus Bhajan Lal &amp; others, CRL.REV.P 869/2017  of 4 (1992) Supp (1) SCC 335. 
In view of the settlement between the parties and payment of the settlement amount, no fruitful purpose would be served in continuation of the proceedings. 
In view of the above, impugned order dated 23.09.2017 is set aside. Petitioner is discharged of the offence. 
Further, it is directed that the petitioner shall, as a way of further service to the community, plant 50 trees, within one month and for the same shall report to the Deputy Conservator of Forests (West), who shall assign him duty to plant 50 trees in Central Ridge Reserve Forest, Budha Jayanti Park, Vandemataram Marg, New Delhi. The plants/trees shall be of deciduous indigenous variety with a nursery age of three and a half years, and a height of at least six feet. Depending upon the soil type and topography, the DCF may consider the following types of trees for plantation:- (i) Gular (Cluster Fig) (ii) Kadamba (Burflower Tree) (iii) Pilkhan (White Fig) (iv) Jaamun (Black Plum) (v) Bargad (Banyan Tree) (vi) Mango (vii) Amaltas (Golden (viii) Mahua (Butter Tree) Shower) [Indian Laburnum] (ix) Putranjiva (x) Badh (xi) Sagwan (Teak Wood) (xii) Safed Siris (Albizia Procera) (xiii) Kala Siris (xiv) Anjeer CRL.REV.P 869/2017  of 4 (xv) Kathal- Jackfruit (xvi) Palash (xvii) Arni (xviii) Bistendu (xix) Rohida (xx) Medshingi 
An affidavit of compliance shall be filed by the petitioner as well as the DCF, failing which the Registry shall list the case for directions. Aerial pictures, prior to and after the afore-directed plantation, shall be obtained by the DCF and filed along with his affidavit. Similar quarterly updates shall be obtained by him to monitor and ensure the upkeep of the said plantation. A Report of the same shall be filed six months after the plantation, along with fresh photographs to show the health/status of the plantation. In case of default, the Registry shall list the case for directions. 
The petition and pending applications are accordingly, disposed of in the above terms. 
Copy of the order be communicated to the concerned Deputy Conservator of Forests (West). 
Order Dasti under signatures of the Court Master. AUGUST 08, 2019 SANJEEV SACHDEVA, J rk CRL.REV.P 869/2017  of 4 